The Half-Point Bye

The organizer may allow players to receive a half point for unplayed games. This is not required by USCF rules. It is strictly a local variation. Here at SDCC, we generally allow a player one half point bye in events up to five rounds, and two for longer events.

Our rules require that a player request his bye in advance of the pairings. That bye then appears on the wallchart in advance of that round.

A player may cancel his bye if he notifies the TD well in advance of that round - USCF recommends 1 hour.

USCF recommends that a last-round bye be requested before the first game is played, and it is (almost) irrevocable. At SDCC, we require that it be requested before the start of round 2.
A USCF variation suggests that a last-round bye may be cancelled, withs the proviso that is the player wins the game, the result shall count as a draw for prize purposes.

The Full-Point Bye

This is the big one. It is much abused. The purpose here is to indemnify a player for whom no opponent is available. It is awarded as the end of pairing a section. Properly, it is part of the pairing process. Notice in our last-round example above, the assignment of the bye was not automatic.

Here, USCF rules apply:

Only ONE may be awarded per section per round.

A full-point bye should not be assigned to a player who has previously taken or committed to a half-point bye unless all others in the score group have had a bye or a no-show forfeit win.

This bye is always given to a rated player, never to an unrated player.

TD can

No player shall be given the bye more than once.

anyway

Players who have received a forfeit win shall NOT be given the full-point bye.

Notice that the general thrust here is that a player should complete a tournament with more than one unplayed point. Not all pairing software takes care of this task reliably!

The House Player

The TD has several methods at his disposal to deal with the unpaired player problem. In order or increasing desirability, these are:

The full-point bye.

A cross-round pairing.

A cross-section pairing.

The mighty HOUSE PLAYER!

A large extremely active and centralized club, such as SDCC, should organize and have at its disposal a cadre of &quot;house&quot; players. These are members who might be available for only one two rounds during an event, or who might be standing down from intensive tournament competition, or who might be conserving on entry fees.

House players of various rating levels should be availabledGeorge Koltanowski was fond of asking, &quot;What is this?&quot;, when confronted with byes on a wallchart. However, to best server the players, they are very useful. Rather than have a player decline to play in an event in which he would have to unavoidably miss a round, it is probably better to give him a half-point and enjoy his participation so that the TD can make appropriate pairings.

Ratings differences of more than 300 points are generally to be avoided. If a greater differential cannot be avoided, the game should beplayed as an extra rated game, and the player given the bye anyway.
